[Music]
welcome to
rebel spirit radio exploring the
frontiers of spirituality
consciousness the esoteric and
humanity's sacred
relationship with a living earth i'm
your host nick mather and in this
episode i speak with dr chris baiche
author of lsd in the mind of the
universe which
details his experience of 73 high-dose
lsd sessions taken over the span of two
decades
in our conversation chris discusses
reincarnation
its role in human evolution the creative
intelligence of the universe
our current ecological moment and more
so much more so please join me
in a fascinating conversation with dr
chris baiche on
rebel spirit radio dr
christopher baiche is professor emeritus
in the department of philosophy
and religious studies at youngstown
state university in ohio where he taught
for 33 years
he's also an adjunct faculty member at
the california institute of integral
studies
emeritus fellow at the institute of
noetic sciences
and serves on the advisory council of
graf legacy training
the heart of chris's work has been the
study of the philosophical implications
of non-ordinary states of consciousness
particularly psychedelic states chris
has written four books
life cycles a study of reincarnation in
light of contemporary consciousness
research
dark knight early dawn an investigation
of psychedelic philosophy and collective
consciousness
the living classroom an exploration of
collective fields of consciousness and
teaching
and his latest work lsd and the mind of
the universe
the story of his 20-year journey with
lsd by way of 73 high-dose lsd sessions
greeting chris and welcome to rebel
spirit radio i am
so very grateful for your time today and
i can't even begin to tell you
how much i'm looking forward to this
conversation yeah i'm glad to be here
good wonderful so um
first i wanted to say that i
thoroughly enjoyed um your book lsd in
the mind of the universe i
found it to be deeply personal
it's beautifully written it's very
engaging
and i believe necessary uh you know i've
read all of your books
and in a way even though this is your
latest
it seems to me to be the first
um as the experiences you described
i think undergird all of your other work
that's correct yeah yeah it seems to me
it's the source material
it really is yeah so
i i wanted to ask you know i'm sure that
my listeners who
are unfamiliar with you and your work
they want to know
you know what led you on this journey
you know what led you to this journey
and why lsd yeah
quite unexpectedly i mean i was raised
in the deep south in mississippi
you know i got a degree in theology from
notre dame
i mean i'm the last person you would
expect to have written a book on
lsd research and especially a
psychedelic autobiography
so i really understand here the
background is
i had i was had just finished my
graduate work at brown university i was
i
finished my work as a philosopher of
religion
i came out of graduate school as an
atheistically inclined agnostic
and i had just begun teaching at
youngstown state in northeast ohio
and i was looking around for where to
take my research
after i mean i was publishing articles
out of my dissertation
and i came across the work of two people
who's
changed my life one of them is ian
stevenson at the university of virginia
and his work on reincarnation
which convinced me in one reading that
reincarnation was a fact of life and
this was
totally new to me in my thinking
and even more influential was the work
of stanislav
groff he had just published realms of
the human unconscious
this was in 1978 when i was a young
academic 30 years old uh so
i i read stan's work
in one reading he convinced me that
of the importance of psychedelics for
philosophical inquiry not just
psychological
inquiry and i became convinced that the
people who would be making the most
important contributions in my field
would be people writing out of an
experiential basis not simply an
intellectual basis
so i had a choice to make because
psychedelics were illegal at this time
and i made the choice to begin
a private hidden
psychedelic inquiry just with myself
which led to eventually 73 high-dose lsd
sessions
following stan groff's protocols as he
outlines
in lsd psychotherapy's book lsd
psychotherapy
and um i during the daytime i was a
conventional
philosopher a philosopher of religion
teaching my students
year in year out and in my private life
i began this systematic exploration of
the deep structure of my consciousness
and by studying my consciousness
studying
how the universe manifested itself
in these deep states of consciousness so
that's how i got into it
wonderful and you know i really
appreciate that because
you know also coming from the background
in religious studies and philosophy
myself
it drives me a little bit crazy
that it's all theoretical
that you know there's so little of the
practical aspect you know the practice
not practical but the practice part of
it
um and you know i think that sometimes
students have a feel
uh for this you know they can tell if
someone not necessarily if
they have had psychedelic experiences
but whether or not they've had
profound religious experience
yeah yeah yeah and
i want to mention right up front that i
do not recommend that people do what i
did
i don't recommend that they setting
aside the issue of the legality or the
illegality of psychedelics okay that's a
changing landscape
right but i don't recommend that people
follow the protocol that i adopted
[Music]
because i know more now than i did in
the beginning
and i really would recommend as i do in
the book i explain
i would recommend a different protocol
if i were doing it over again today
yeah it um it doesn't it it doesn't read
like it was fun
you describe a lot of pain and suffering
which is something i want to get to
but you know i think that a lot of folks
who
aren't familiar with psychedelics
probably have a false view of them in
many ways
you know this isn't a wild weekend in
las vegas
or um you know i think there's also a
lot of fear
involved uh centered around psychedelics
um
i wanted to um since we're kind of
talking about
you know you had to keep this secret and
you described in the book how this
it was that was also painful for you
that you couldn't
be um open about this for a variety of
reasons you know
the illegality of course is important
it also i think probably there was a
question of
uh credibility with some of the academic
community
who i think still have a tendency to
look down on these experiences
um and you know you mentioned that the
landscape
seems to be changing somewhat yeah
i know that i think oregon legalized
psilocybin mushrooms
uh there is legislation currently moving
through california to decriminalize
all psychedelics yeah um and i'm i'm
kind of
curious
given this new landscape where
psychedelics are more accepted
have you ever wondered or
thought about what it would have been
like
to teach in this sort of new
environment or a new environment where
these things are
more accepted wouldn't that have been
interesting there i mean at
first i did have an opportunity to do
some teaching at the california
institute of integral studies in the
philosophy cosmology and consciousness
program
but this came rather late in my series i
mean basically
i did my work between 1979
and 1999 when i was between 30 years old
and 50 years old
you know and now i'm in my early 70s so
so i did have an opportunity to teach
graduate students this material
after darknet early dawn came out
but it would be fascinating to be able
to be
doing this work in the classroom today
um instead of in online
you know settings and whatnot but
there's another there's an
upside for having waited as long as i
did
i waited 20 years until after i had
finished this work
to write lsd in the mind of the universe
and i did so not only for the legal
ramifications but i did so because these
experiences were extremely
difficult to understand when you work
with high doses of lsd
it pushes you into dimensions of reality
that go considerably considerably beyond
what even appears in much of the
mystical literature
and it just and and the methodology that
you're using to engage these deep states
of consciousness is very different than
the methodology that's found in
contemplative
you know meditative mystical traditions
and
so there were a lot of riddles to figure
out a lot of puzzles
and if i had been teaching while i was
doing this work
i i might not been able to produce as
mature a final product
so by holding on to it for a long time
really
pondering it and working out a lot of
the details
i think the end result is a more
polished clear presentation
of the stages of the journey because my
experience was
but well two things and my experience
was
i went through a series of death and
rebirth experiences going through layer
after layer after layer
in in the universe but let me say
something about the methodology itself
because as you say this is an
unfamiliar protocol and if people
are familiar with psychedelics at all
they tend to think of psychedelics
either as the recreational in a
recreational way of
tripping and um you know social taking
psychedelics and socializing or
you know going into the woods or
something or if they're
informed by today's you know experiences
they would think of psychedelics in
terms of a therapeutic protocol
aimed at he at personal healing
the work i did methodologically was
similar to
the current protocols under adoption
that is
i was working completely isolated from
the outside world
every day that i did a session i had no
contact with the outside world
i was by myself in my home or
in my then wife's office and my former
wife was my sitter
for all my sessions so i was working
under the care and supervision
of a clinical psychologist
isolated lying down on the floor eye
shades
earphones listening to very carefully
uh selected music that was specifically
designed to
pace the various stages of opening and
closing in a session
and then my i would write up my session
within
24 hours of the session so it's it's a
very
different environment than if you're you
know
taking lsd and going to a concert or
something like that
yeah yeah for sure um
i'm curious in a sense um because you
were doing this
at a you know the high dose level
would the same methodology apply for
lower dosages
same methodology would apply uh
but the the nature
the nature of the journey is different
when you work with lower doses
or with gentler psychedelics like
psilocybin perhaps or ayahuasca
you basically your these what
psychedelics do
is they amplify the unconscious they
amplify
consciousness and they catalyze
consciousness so
things that are usually far
beyond your capacity out of your
conscious ability to experience
begin to come forward into your
experience so there is a churning
and a rising of unconscious content
in your conscious awareness if you're
working with lower doses
of a psychedelic that you tend to peel
consciousness in layers
so you may spend lots and lots of time
working
through various psychodynamic levels of
consciousness
then moving stage by stage slowly into
deeper levels of consciousness
when you work with high doses of
psychedelic there's a much more powerful
cathartic
sense of it and you you tend to move
very
quickly through various psychodynamic
levels
and engage starting with what stan calls
the perinatal level of consciousness
or at the boundary between physical
reality and
and spiritual reality and then you keep
pushing
deeper and deeper into various levels of
transpersonal
or spiritual uh consciousness
okay um one more question
kind of about methodology a understand
that
it's helpful to
[Music]
begin a session by stating an intention
and you had an intention i believe that
you wrote it was something like you know
me i made this help me serve the common
good
or something like that but then later
you you write
that with the high doses you were taking
that the intention didn't seem
to matter that you were taken where
i guess by this cosmic intelligence
which we can talk about a little bit
later i wanted to take you
um i'm curious is the intention still
important in the low-dose
sessions or is there a similarity where
you can set the intention
but you're gonna go wherever
whatever is driving this experience
wants to take you
i think it's a combination of both uh
if you are the the essence of this type
of practice
is surrender you just completely once
you create safe conditions
once you are really contained you
surrender completely to the experience
and let it take you
wherever it wants to go whether or not
you understand it
at the time but when you are working
with lower doses
it it disrupts your psychological
structure
less and so your your reasons for doing
the work
can influence more where you go when you
work with
high doses my experience was at least my
personal experience was that it
it just whatever intention i had
going into the work was very quickly uh
completely shattered and it didn't
really make much difference the
intention i brought in
i was on a journey and a deeper
consciousness a larger consciousness was
guiding my journey
and there were many many things that
happened and i didn't really
understand in certain respects i did not
understand the deep structure of what
was happening
until years and years of
experiences later i mean there was a
journey that i was on and you can't
understand
what's happening simply from where
you've been in the past
without knowing where you're going in
the future so it's from the hindsight
perspective that
i can understand some of the structure
of what happened
but what i found was that i was always
engaging
or being guided by an intelligence which
i think of as
the mind of the universe a cosmic
intelligence
okay um yeah i wanted to talk a little
bit more about this
cosmic intelligence and you know is
is this what other people might identify
as god is it something beyond god
um what else can you
say about this you know i'm assuming
that this is the mind of the universe
from the title of the book
yes what shall we call it you know
we call it god but then all of a sudden
we have to
start dealing with all the historical
conditions and interpretations of that
concept in the different religions of
the world
and i'm not really comfortable with that
uh i'd use we've sometimes refer to it
as the divine
but that's really just a step sideways a
little bit
i don't know what we should call it
you might call it the dow i think of it
as the intelligence the generative
intelligence of the universe the
the intelligence which is responsible
for the big bang
and the unfolding of all time and space
since the big bang i mean i have this
virtual background behind me because
just
because it tokens the dimensions of the
universe which we have
now understand in this century better
than we've ever understood before
how incredibly large it is how
incredibly old it is and
psychedelic research adds to this it's
also
conscious so the size of the universe
and the age of the universe are a
reflection in a way of the
intelligence and the consciousness of
the universe
and it is so large we can't see the
edges of it
and it's so old we can't see to the
beginning of it
so what shall we call this in classical
cultures one would call it god but the
but the interpretations of god over the
last 6 000 years have always been
constricted by the cultural context in
which these
concepts have been formed and i don't
want to buy into that
and yet there are certain clearly
certain qualities about this
consciousness
which echo the qualities of
the infinite divinity which have been
talked about
particularly in the mystical traditions
of the world's spiritual traditions more
than in the
uh neighborhood church theology
specifically in the contemplative
mystical traditions
yeah it kind of when you speak it kind
of reminds me
of the merkabah mysticism of ezekiel
where you can't actually describe or
explain
this full vision of god but you can talk
about the throne you can talk about the
hem of
you know the the robe that god is
wearing but it's just a very
small portion of this grander vision
yeah i think so i i think in the end i
mean i've
i've spent more ink than most people
trying to describe these things
and even so i still
feel like i'm really just talking about
the hem of the garment
yeah yeah absolutely so i want to
dig a little bit deeper into this
cosmology that
is that was revealed to you
but also you reveal to
your readers and one of the
the key elements is reincarnation
and like you said earlier um
you were deeply informed by the work of
ian stevenson at the university of
virginia and i
agree with you i think that he provides
absolute evidence even though he was
very cautious
you know trying to be a good scientist
there
but i think that the evidence is
unequivocal um but yeah
you have a bit of a different
take on reincarnation it seems
than the traditional understanding
um and so i i would like you to
uh if you could speak to that a little
bit more um
and uh say uh something also about how
reincarnation fits into this cosmology
well ian stevenson and a host of
researchers who have followed in his
stead
and a host of therapists who have been
working in
pa in past life therapy in the hundreds
and hundreds of cases that they've
generated convince us
if you're really unbiased and you really
look at the data i think it's
overwhelmingly clear
that reincarnation occurs that there is
continuity of a memory across multiple
lifetimes
that our consciousness is older than our
body
so the mind that i'm using to speak to
you now
has a history that's older than my
physical body
but how it works you know we
we still are beginners in this we don't
really know the physics of reincarnation
we don't really know what the soul
is we don't know how consciousness
encodes its learning into a new brain
physiology we don't know how
consciousness
leaves at the when a person dies how
our experience leaves intact and stays
coherent
after the body falls apart there's so
much
that we don't know i'm sure we'll be
learning more as we go on
but there's much that we don't know and
i think many of our early
understandings of reincarnation
are just inadequate i mean for example
the idea that
you incarnate as a human being and then
you come back as an animal
you know and most sophisticated thinkers
of reincarnation reject that idea
that it's like once you once you can
function at a certain level
there's nothing to be gained from coming
back and functioning
at a lesser or lower capacity level so
once a human
human and up in a way other ideas that
that reincarnation is somehow something
simple like going from one life to
another life to another life
much more complicated because when you
get into the past life literature
you find that actually my
present life is informed not simply by
my most immediate
previous life but my my multiple lives
that i have already lived so it's like
playing cards the deck may have 52 cards
but you only dealt a certain number of
cards for a particular hand
so the a certain number of my former
lives may be
active in structuring some of the issues
that i'm dealing with in this life and
for the most part the other lives are
quiescent and in the background so to
speak so
lots and lots of of changes and
modifications to the idea
but the basic vision is that
when we die we expand
into a larger state of consciousness
which i think of as the soul
and i define the soul as the
consciousness
that holds all of our experience all of
our incarnational experience
when we incarnate we contract down
into a very limited physical body
historical circumstance social
circumstance so on so
forth we it's like going to college
when you start the college we start the
semester you're in a specific set of
courses
learning is a specific set of things
then at the end of the semester spring
break you know you expand into a
larger state when you die you go into a
larger state
reconnect with the universe and you
contract
so reincarnation the pulse of
reincarnation
is this rhythm of expansion of death and
contracting at birth
over and over and over and over again
whatever the details
and in this process we learn we
challenge ourselves we we become more
than we were before
and naturally the lessons that we're
investigating exploring in what every
lifetime
matures just like students go back and
forth to college semester after semester
but they're studying different things as
they the longer they stay in school
they're maturing they're developing new
capacities
the the primary difference that i
see from traditional that i hold from
traditional thinking about reincarnation
is that
classically in the eastern traditions
which are firm reincarnation
the idea is that we grow we grow we grow
and then if we come to a spiritual
plateau
where we truly wake up to what's been
going on and we
wake up to what we are we wake up to
that
essence of us which has never died the
essence which allows us to die and be
reborn that essence which
in hinduism it's called atman and that
atman
is brahman the essence of the individual
is the essence of the divine
in classical reincarnation thinking
when you are sufficiently mature
that you wake up to this deeper
spiritual identity
and experience some of the deep
spiritual truths
of oneness of the essence of divine
being
the essence of everything which exists
at that point
when you die you leave the system you
leave time
space and there is a culmination which
takes place
off planet whether it's heaven or
the islamic garden or the buddha pure
land
that existence culminates off planet in
leaving
i i understand that theory i understand
its historical context and i think it
makes sense
given what we are capable of
understanding when these ideas began to
percolate about three to four thousand
years ago
but as we now understand
more about the universe more about the
evolutionary
development of the universe more about
the time frame
of the universe i think we are beginning
to see
a different outcome i think the goal of
reincarnation
at least the i don't think we can see
the ultimate goal
any more than we can see the ultimate
goal of the universe
but the intermediate goal is to wake up
and not to leave but to wake up and to
fully embody your soul consciousness
in physical reality so the soul
wakes up and you're you you
no longer are tempted to identify
with your physical body as yourself
the soul wakes up and i call this in the
book the birth of the diamond soul
that we wake up and
we have first of all we remember our
farmer lives
more importantly we live consciously
the deep life which has been gestating
inside all these incremental courses
that we've been taking all these
centuries
that's absolutely beautiful and um i
love
that you um you know
it's this not escaping into
a heaven or transcendence or nothingness
in nirvana
but you know you say it's this deepening
of a sacred presence on the earth
yes and i i'm kind of
one of the questions that came up for me
while listening to you
was you know we don't remember
necessarily our past lives
but you know some children have you know
some
um aspects of it and you know i've
always suspected that there are some
things
with me that come from past life
experiences
that i just can't explain um
and i've just had this ongoing suspicion
that
something that happened previously that
explains everything
um but what i'm curious about
is having this
this this knowledge that
we are souls on this journey
does that how i'm
trying to figure out how i want to state
this question but um
and i don't want to say obligation but
can we start working being cognizant of
this
can we start doing things now
in our lives to
affect the long picture of this cycle
and where we are in this cycle um
can i do things now that will
consciously affect my rebirth
i guess maybe is the way i'm uh i think
so
and and i think to their credit uh the
spiritual traditions the classic spirit
traditions have
always said even once you begin to
understand what's happening
once you begin to understand the truth
of reincarnation
and the truth of karma and karma simply
is the the cycle of cause and effect
which conditions consciousness and
conditions destiny
once you begin to understand that then
whether or not you have
active recall of your former lives
you can still begin to make you can
improve the quality of your choices
so for example once once you understand
karma
you naturally begin to make non-choices
of non-injury
you make begin to make more choices of
generosity
you begin to make choices which are not
simply
tuned to the short term circumstance but
choices of the long term we see this in
the native american tradition where
you're looking for seven generations
every important choice choices over
seven generations
that basic mindset that you begin to
think
long term and you think not just how
your choices are affecting you
but understanding how they affect other
people
understanding that spiritually you and
other people are like
two leaves on the same branch of a tree
you're separate
at one level but you're not separated
another
and once you kind of even understand
that intellectually
you make choices that serve the good of
the tree
and in making choices that are larger
and more deep and deeper you
accelerate your evolutionary development
you accelerate it and you improve the
outcome of this lifetime
and this is this does not require
knowing who you were in the 17th century
or anything like that
it simply requires that you begin to
understand
the structure of reality this is what
the hindus call
dharma the the teachings of the about
the way things are
and it's simply learning what's real
and then adjusting yourself to live in
harmony
with what's real wonderful i
i was actually thinking this morning um
in thinking about this uh conversation
the analogy that you used of the native
american belief you know the
seven generations out
it kind of occurred to me that in this
picture that you're presenting you know
i think that when we hear this seven
generations out we often
consider them as that they're not us
yeah but in reincarnation they are us
[Laughter]
yeah and and and i was wondering if more
people had that idea
how would it change because how would it
change
how we act in the world right now yeah
you know
um well let's take just the ecological
situation in
a fundamental way reincarnation tells us
that the world we come back to
is the world we leave not only in terms
of its psychological structure
but literally in terms of the earth now
we've never faced a situation like we
are facing now
in terms of the impact of our industrial
culture
on the entire planet but if we truly
believe
that in a hundred years from now we're
going to be back on this earth
don't you think we'd be make taking
better care of the earth don't you think
we'd be
looking to more care of our ecological
systems
if we believe that we would be coming
back into society
and we would did not know and could not
control necessarily
what part of society were coming back
into
don't you think we would be trying to
create
a society that worked for all that was
just for all
that was fair in its distribution of
resources
so yeah i think those choices those
ideas do have
impact on how we
think about organizing our culture yeah
and it seems to me
that it's you know because i've thought
about this before
where you know i try to be as
environmentally
aware and cognizant as i can be and not
harm
although i know that i do and
part of that is just by the virtue of
this system that we are embedded in
um but i but i've often thought about
this in terms of
karma and that my actions now
are definitely going to affect
you know these future generations
and it seems kind of fundamentally wrong
to me
to think that i would escape or any of
us would escape the consequences of that
yeah um and
and i wonder um
we'll move on from reincarnation here in
a little bit but
i'm deeply fascinated by the question um
if more people um accepted
this idea of reincarnation um
or were aware of this um
do you think and and this larger vision
that you're providing
because one of the questions i wanted to
ask you about this is it seems to me
and i'm probably jumping way forward
more than i should be
but it seems to me that we are
undergoing
this transformation of spirituality
um especially in the united states
um and i think that more and more people
are hearing sort of the call to
spirituality
um i i've personally been going through
this for the past couple of years
and i'm at this place where i
just want absolutely everything i do to
be grounded
in in spiritual practices and i know i
have
other friends that
are doing similar things and so my
question is
do you think this is part of the
evolution of our collective
consciousness do you think that
we are moving towards this larger vision
that
um you experienced
i think so uh i think that
while there is a a growing uh
appreciation and awareness and thirst
for spiritual truth
spiritual encounter uh it's not
necessarily expressing itself
as a an increase of religiosity or an
increase of religious participation and
personally i think what's happening is
that the religions that exist today
have largely done the bulk of the work
that they were kind of charged with
doing
i mean once you understand the breadth
the length
of human evolution how many
hundreds of thousands of years we are
involved
in evol growing and growing and growing
and growing
then when you look at religions and
religions don't last
more than a few thousand years you know
four you know a few thousand years
and a religion can't we have a history
of sort of thinking that a religion if
it's true it's eternally true it'll be
true forever and ever
but that doesn't really seem to be
realistic and i think
it's more likely that a religion
helps an evolving humanity helps a
reincarnating humanity
go from a to b and then we come to b
and there's so much more to go it
requires a new set of insights a new
inspiration a new vision to take us from
b
to c and when we get to c it'll require
a new vision to take us from c to d
and i think we're at that a phase where
the vision which has taken us to here
is is not sufficient to take us
where we need to go next and i would
mention
that all the religions of the world and
i know you're a professor of religion so
you'll appreciate that there are
fundamentally
two core mistakes that all the religions
of
the axial age make many others perhaps
but at least two
one of them is it gets women wrong
yeah okay political systems you know
and so relatedly it gets nature wrong
so our when you have an up and out
theology
where the goal is to become spiritually
awakened
or to spiritually saved and then leave
time and space you have this gap so that
the physical world is not
valued as deeply as the spiritual world
and you know you're so on so forth
so what happens is we don't really have
an
answer to the question what is the
purpose
of time space what is the purpose of the
physical world
it becomes a veil of tears or it becomes
something that we basically are trying
to get away from
to get back home or to get to some place
better
that these religions are wrong about
women
and they're wrong about the earth and
what we need going forward
is a vision of reality that
is larger that includes the best of the
insights
of the religions of the past but then
expands them into
a new set of visions which is truly
gender balanced
and also species balanced because now
you know the religions have been
for the most part and anthropocentric
in that they value men and human beings
more than
other species and a vision which
values physicality values
the experience of being physical
as more than simply a training ground
for going to heaven
yeah very good yeah i think we're
basically
we're in a transition time the collapse
of the old
is getting clearer and clearer but it's
not yet clear
what the new is going to be yet because
we're at the cusp
it's like we're in the middle of a night
and we are seeing the early early layers
of dawn
but we really have not seen what's going
what's coming forward
fully it's a very uncomfortable time
to be in because there's so much
uncertainty
things are falling apart we haven't
really congealed around a new vision yet
there's a lot of anxiety a lot of back
and forth a lot of push
pull a lot of conflict we can see this
this polarization in the political arena
but now we don't have any time
the earth is forcing us into uh
a new formation of our values yeah
absolutely and you know i um
was thinking that there's so much i want
to say but um
i was i was thinking about our current
moment and in particular with this
pandemic
and initially i thought that
the pandemic was a almost like a final
warning shot
um and a last opportunity to
make a lot of meaningful changes
you know i remember when the lockdowns
first happened
um i was out walking one evening and you
know i'm in
pasadena which is in l.a county
and the air was clean you know i could
breathe and i think for a while
la had some of the cleanest air in the
nation um
you know there were stories about
dolphins returning to
the canals in venice and wildlife coming
into the cities and
for me one of the great things about
this even though i was
riddled with anxieties um was it was
quiet again i could hear nature and
you would hear stories about that like
in new york you could hear birdsong
again
and i thought well this is amazing this
is even though this is
horrible it's also potential
and then a couple of weeks ago we had
thunderstorm
uh here and um it wasn't too bad but
there was this tremendous crack of
thunder
and you might appreciate this but since
you know i i grew up in ohio so i hear
this crack of thunder i immediately have
to go out to my front porch
and it wasn't really raining and it
wasn't horribly overcast i could
actually see pollution again hovering
over a nearby freeway and i could hear
the sounds from the freeway
i could hear cars and horns and a siren
and i thought then it's like it
it's too late you know you know we've
lost our chance
we have to go through these experiences
and it seems to me that
in your book you you actually make it
seems like you're suggesting something
similar
we have to go through this we are going
to have to
experience this pain
that we spend so much time avoiding the
pain
but it's a necessary part of this
initiation into
a new form of humanity um
am i getting that right i think we are
being initiated i mean we're kind of
jumping
this is a chapter that i deal with
towards the very end of the book so
we're kind of jumping over a lot of
intermediate places but basically
i think humanity is being initiated into
a new level of consciousness and a new
level of maturity uh we're basically
inheriting the consequences
of our egoic history where and the ego
is a beautiful thing i think the ego
often gets a
bad rap in the religious traditions but
individual
consciousness is a beautiful thing i
mean it's just an
extraordinarily beautiful mechanism but
it's fundamentally fragmented it really
cuts us off from each other we don't
experience necessarily the common ground
that we share with each other and with
other life forms and with the physical
world itself
and i think we can no longer afford
that kind of fragmentation because the
world
built by the ego the a civilization
built by the ego is an
inherently divided and fragmented world
it's uh in
divides into have and have nots just the
definition of who it was haves and who
the have nots are
changes but it's a fragmented world
and it's a world
we are basically inheriting centuries
and centuries
of the consequences of a world built by
the ego
and we need to grow up to become
less of an adolescent and more of an
adult
taking adult size responsibility
adult-sized vision
and an adult-sized commitment um
yeah and and i think there's there's
going to be pain
because uh these the choices of the past
have accumulated
not only in our social systems in our
legal systems economic systems
but they've also accumulated within our
bodies
and we have all this history and so
there's a tremendous detoxification
that's taking place and it's about to
take place
in a purification process and
and i think that basically we're coming
into
i mean this is i think of this as a
birth process
and birth is really really hard work as
every woman
will tell you i mean gestation is a long
gradual process but birth
when the waters break and it's time to
get that baby out
that's a very short and cathartic and
powerful
process and i think basically
what's happening is this new human or
this future human
has been gestating inside of us for
thousands and thousands of incarnations
the the diamond soul has been gestating
and developing and developing
century by century century by century
and now it's time
for this higher
being this larger being this deeper
being to be born
labor is hard work and i think we're
going into global labor
yeah yeah and it seems
you know along those lines that we also
have
you know you say that we've embodied a
lot of this trauma
and also the trauma from our past lives
and that we are going through a
necessary
healing process and the pain is part of
that healing it seems
yeah i'm also kind of curious um
about not just in terms of the past
lives
um but also in terms of i guess like
ancestors
you know um i think about this
personally my family has
a lot to account for um
but i also thought of it in terms of
just the
culturally you know like we have the
founding fathers and those are our kind
of collective ancestors and there's a
lot of
pain and trauma from them
that we still have to account for
well just as we are those future seven
generations
we are our ancestors so our ancestors
are not separate and other than us
but in a reincarnating universe where
generation after generation we're
constantly coming being born
uh that that means that the ancestors in
us are in the
how it's easy to over generalize and to
oversimplify what is an incredibly
subtle and complex process so i
forgive me if i do that but the strains
of our ancestors
the themes and the learning of our
ancestors qualities of our ancestors
are woven into our current incarnation
and and not only the the pains left
over from our former lives but also
the strengths and and and incredible
qualities
see i think that many of us have learned
about reincarnation by reading the
literature on past life therapy
so our approach to our understanding of
reincarnation tends to be
inflected by a therapeutic model
and people go into therapy not because
of the things that makes them feel good
they go into therapy because of their
pain
but i think that's really a relatively
small percentage of the
carryover from our previous lives our
school system
has many many problems but most
kids pass every year most kids
learn all right and i think the most
people
learn and come out of every incarnation
with more positive than negative and we
carry the positive forward
as well as carrying the negative forward
so that there's a tremendous
accumulation of capacity
of intelligence built into our into our
bodies
of musical intelligence and mathematical
intelligence and social intelligence
that are in a sense the voices of our
ancestors alive
in us as we continue to this process
of becoming the ancestors of our future
selves
wonderful and that gets to i think one
of the
final points i wanted to get at in terms
of
uh reincarnation which is
you talk a bit about and you have been
speaking about
the evolution here and you know the
evolution of the species
and reincarnation i think at one point
you say
that evolution grows species where
reincarnation grows individuals
but there seems to be this connection
between human evolution
and as a species and the individual
reincarnation yes i was wondering if you
could maybe say a little bit more about
that
i think of reincarnation as the higher
octave
of evolution and and of course
well evolution our scientists tell us
that
evolution is an evolving of whole
species it's a learning and development
of whole
species somewhere along the way
nature has figured out or the
intelligence behind nature has figured
out
how to evolve individuals within certain
highly developed species
so somewhere along the way as we move
from
group evolution individual evolution is
added on top of that where it becomes
a matter of the evolution of our
consciousness
so it it has to do with the birth of
individuality when
individuality begins to emerge within
species
where does that begin no one knows quite
for sure but
somewhere along the way species begin to
birth
individuals then those individuals make
choices
and those choices begin to influence
their learning
and once you have that cycle established
you have the cause and effect
that's influencing not just the
physiology of species
but the psychophysiology of individuals
so i think of reincarnation as the
higher octave
of evolution it is when
evolution has reached a point where
it is involving individuals
and it is evolving the consciousness of
individuals
okay wonderful and when you were
speaking the thought occurred to me
that this model avoids
in a sense and maybe i'm wrong but it
seems to avoid
this issue of um
like intelligent design that it's coming
from outside
because it seems like in this model we
are the ones
that are actively driving
human evolution through this cycle would
that be correct
yeah i think i think the
idea of design in this way
is a reaction to the sort of
inadequacy of conventional evolutionary
theory
and its failure to inexplain certain
aspects of evolution
so intelligent design uh is an
attempt to bridge some of those gaps but
the problem is that it's all
external you always have an external
deity
who's tinkering from the outside and
i would think that evolution and
reincarnation is an emergent
principle it's the intelligence is
already there
in matter the intelligence is
manifesting itself in ever greater
complexity
partly through the mechanisms recognized
by science but partly through other
mechanisms subtler
mechanisms but it's an emergent quality
which means it's arising from within
so evolution arises from within
organisms
and evolution arises within a
reincarnation
it's it's so it's a it's a
self-expressive
self-transformative process
okay yeah that that makes a lot of sense
um
i i want to turn to
uh some of your uh experiences again
and this idea of
and we've already talked about this a
little bit but the the
the the pain and the experiences and
you know you describe again this ocean
of suffering that's both
personal and collective and you know
it seems to me that most religions
i think all religions have something to
say about suffering and many of them
are centered around ending the suffering
but you write that we need to be open to
our suffering
um yeah uh
so let me back let's back up a little
bit okay let's back into a context
here when you are working
in a therapeutic modality with
psychedelics your system becomes
hyper conscious you are temporarily more
conscious than you were before and what
happens when
when you do that is that the system
begins to spontaneously cleanse itself
to clean itself
so it brings forward not simply it
brings forward
the parts of your past which you've had
difficulty dealing with
it brings forward your pain it brings
forward your fears it brings forward
you know so on and so forth and by
confronting those fears and confronting
those pains
heroically one can bring to better
resolution
things that had gotten started somewhere
in the past but didn't really
work out completely so
deaths that were ugly uh relationships
that were
ugly or problematic in different ways
so you basically by embracing
the suffering which presents itself to
you in your sessions
you engage that you see it
you let it into your awareness and by
letting it into your awareness
you bring it it
brings itself to better outcome and when
you face the trauma say in a particular
aspect of life either from this life or
from another life something like this
then there is a tremendous relaxation
that takes place in the system
and the system is then free to move into
deeper and deeper levels of reality
now in the early stages of one's work
one reaches a point where
when consciousness begins to expand
beyond
time-space reality
you begin to be threatened with what is
called ego death
an ego here means simply the identity
that you have formed
in your time space experience
but when consciousness begins to go
beyond
that time space identity that time space
identity
eventually is shattered it dies
simply because your mind is bigger than
your body
and your body's history and you go
through an ego death experience which is
very painful
it's it's kind of like an inversion of
everything that you've ever known
yourself to be
but you go through that process and in
that surrender
one's consciousness is liberated into
deeper textures
of mind deeper textures of consciousness
if you continue this process if you keep
exploring these deeper textures
you will go through more cycles of
purification
more cycles which eventually lead to
deeper layers of dying deeper layers of
surrendering
and you will go through another
catharsis of death
and then you'll be exploded into yet
deeper dimensions of reality
which you will then be able to explore
in future sessions
again this is always working within a
very
highly focused regimen of exploration
it's not like this way this time this
way that time you really
always working a particular edge
now as you go through different layers
of
of consciousness of
consciousness which transcends your
individual
awareness there are
different patterns that you engage and
so there some of the early patterns will
be these
unfinished businesses from your personal
life and from your soul's life
but sometimes you engage unfinished
trauma that's species-wide that has to
do with your entire human family
and this is what i write about in a
chapter called the ocean of suffering
where after i'd gone through ego death
and after i continued to go deeper
i began to get drawn into
vast fields of human suffering just
terrible terrible anger terrible torture
terrible pain and suffering
and it went on for two years just huge
tracts of human suffering and eventually
at first i saw this essay a refining of
ego death as sort of another layer of
the death of my own ego but eventually i
came to the conclusion that this was
wrong
that this was not a something aimed at
my
personal transformation at all it was
aimed at
the transformation of nothing less than
my entire human family
that somehow in these experiences in
these sessions
if you are if you are willing to go
go there by bringing
into your consciousness the suffering of
humanity
in some way shape or form if you're
willing to let the suffering of humanity
come into your full consciousness and
remember that
by saying your consciousness i'm not
talking about crispy's narrow
personality consciousness because at
this point your consciousness has
expanded
to much much much larger dimensions
so it is as if you are the species
remembering the species pain
and reliving the species pain
and if you do that you
there is a a transformation that takes
place
which registers within your individual
awareness
but it also i think registers and this
is
the hypothesis but it registers within
the awareness
of the human species as a whole that i
think we are
actually working to heal humanity
of some of the trauma that it's carrying
just as an individual carries the scars
of his or her trauma
the species carries the scars all the
wars of all the terrible things we've
done to each other
all the all the terrible things we've
is still carried in the collective
psyche
so for two years i was processing
this pain and let me back up
in every session there's a purification
part
and there's an ecstatic part right so
it's not like there was nothing but pain
and suffering from all these sessions
there were several hours of pain and
suffering
and then they would come to a
culmination and i would go through some
type of
dying process and then i would be spun
out
into ecstatic transpersonal spaces where
i would be given more
instruction more opportunities to learn
and grow
so it was always a rhythm of
purification
personal or collective followed by
ecstatic instruction
personal art collective all right and
then eventually
after two years of working in the ocean
of suffering
i went through a profound culmination of
that process
hard to describe but i do the best i can
in the book
and then it stopped it never reoccurred
and i was operating from that point on i
was operating
beyond the collective psyche level
beyond the level of the
of the collective unconscious i was
catapulted
first into archetypal reality and had
it's been a year and a half exploring
different dimensions of archetypal
reality
and then there was another death and
rebirth process which catapulted me into
what some thinkers would call causal
reality
uh the reality of oneness where you
begin to explore
what life is like in a sense you might
say what like if it's like from the
perspective of the divine or from the
perspective of the creative intelligence
itself
because the creative intelligence has
manifested
itself in the body of the universe
and there is divisions and diversity in
the universe
but within itself there is a
oneness which has never been shattered
which is not divided
and you can dissolve into that oneness
and when you dissolve into the oneness
you experience
all of reality functioning as an
undivided whole
different you know different colors
different textures different qualities
different beings in a way
but underneath those differences a
fundamental
wholeness and then there was yet another
series of deaths and rebirths and then i
was catapulted
into yet another level of reality beyond
causal level reality
so the last the last thing i treat
in the first chapter of the book where
i'm introducing the method
is my primary concern i have
for readers of this book and that is the
quantity of suffering
that it tells and
and it's not because i'm a satan
masochist
it's not because i enjoy suffering i'm
like any ordinary person i'd like to
avoid my suffering thank you very much
but the suffering is part of a cycle of
purification
and once you learn that the the deepest
breakthroughs
and the deepest insights come after the
deepest purifications
and you learn that rhythm that there is
purification and then breakthrough
then you surrender to the suffering
willingly
in order to be of use to the system to
be of use to the universe but then also
to receive the blessings that are
waiting for you
when you go through that process that
are on the other side of that suffering
okay yeah and um uh
yeah that answers a lot of questions
because it answers
why you know you you write that you know
creation is a choice and we all
voluntarily participate you know we
choose to
take this on but
there's always a blessing there's always
a blessing after
all of this which i think is phenomenal
um let me ask you um
the subtitle of the book which you refer
to as the inner title
is the uh diamonds from heaven yeah
are these diamonds from heaven are is
this the blessing
is this the gift that we get from going
through this process
well there are many blessings that come
in this work
there are many blessings of insight of
transformation
of opening and deepening but
the phrase diamonds from heaven i i use
in a more
specific way after i had been doing this
work for 15 years
and i was had worked through all the
layers of ego death and then
collective species ego death and
archetypal reality and causal level
realities
i was catapulted i went through yet
another death rebirth process and i was
catapulted
into a dimension of consciousness
or a dimension of reality
which was pure light clear clear
clear crystalline light
i had experienced light as many
psychedelic
voyagers do at different levels of one's
journey
but this was when i call it diamond
consciousness or diamond luminosity i'm
not simply using
a metaphor to describe the light i'm
trying to describe a particular
quality of light ultra ultra ultra
clear clear beyond imagination
and over the last over the next five
years the last five years of my
work in 26 sessions so about a third of
the entire sessions of the
of my journey i was taken into this
diamond luminosity
four times and in between those four
times there's
lots and lots of purification many
lessons and many teachings but lots of
purification
and it's those four sessions and the
immersion
in the diamond luminosity on those four
days
which i consider the greatest diamonds
from heaven they are the true diamonds
from heaven
they are the for me the most important
take away
the domain i entered when i looked in at
the religious
literature to try to find the closest
thing that would correspond to this of
course the divine is always
imaged as light which is relevant
but in buddhism
they re talk about dharmakaya this
dimension of reality dharmakaya and they
call it
the clear light of absolute reality it
is the light out of which the big bang
emerges
uh and that i think is what i was
experiencing in
what i call the diamond luminosity okay
yeah there were a lot of um
the the cosmology that you present seems
to be
very buddhist in many ways um
there's there are clearly some
differences you know especially with the
reincarnation to
that you know the goal is not to enter
party or nirvana
um but to um
uh continue evolving
um uh i wonder are there any other
differences i mean do you feel that this
in many ways
confirmed much of buddhism or
um you know what are the what would be
the differences
well i've really been deeply influenced
by all the religions of the world i mean
i taught world religions
for decades you know so every semester i
was going around the world
um exploring so i've been deeply
influenced by
christianity and i i began life as a
christian and as a catholic i actually
was in the seminary for four years
studying to be a catholic priest
and the two and i've
learned so much from hinduism and
buddhism and taoism
and some of the native american
traditions
the two which have been the most the
deepest and long-lasting influences on
me and judaism i should add i mean i
learned hebrew because i was doing
biblical studies in the early years i
learned
greek and hebrew uh have been
christianity
and buddhism uh and
so i think my my journey
affirms the deepest truths of
christianity
and all the world's religions i think
that affirms the deep truths of
of the kabbalah in judaism and of
hinduism and buddhism
and at the same time not just in
reincarnation the theory of
reincarnation that emerged in my work
but in many ways
it affirms but it also eclipses
the religions of the last several
thousand years
because i think the the universe that i
was initiated into
the opportunities that i was given to
explore
the deep structure of reality took me
into let's say it demanded
that i developed levels of understanding
that went beyond
anything that i had learned or been
exposed to in these
in the religions of the world and i
began to
i was forced to sort of learn how to
become operational
within an even deeper metaphysics that
said
i think these experiences do affirm the
core truths
of the different religions it doesn't
affirm the kind of
the cultural privilege that each
religion places on its own
teacher its own lineage its own
revelation
its own scripture those are
because every religion says these
scriptures are unique in the word of god
that tells us that none of them are
really unique
all of them are part of a larger dynamic
process
but it affirms the core insights of of
of the
fundamental part the way we are
participating in each other's reality
the way that we're all hardwired
together
and that our our deepest well-being
lies in serving not just our small good
but the good of all the good of the
whole uh
the value of self-sacrifice that you
know
he who that it's worthwhile to sacrifice
for the good of others
when the opportunity calls for us to do
that
taking the long vision looking to the
deep future
orienting ourselves to the deep future
opening our consciousness to the
inspiration
that comes from deep deep within not
only our own being
but that inspiration that arises out of
nature itself at the very very deepest
levels of nature
as the taoists would say to become one
with the dao
you know that that type of deep
inspiration
so on the one hand i feel very
comfortable with the religions of the
world
and at the same time i feel
where i've ended up is in a place which
is larger
than the re than the religions of the
world yeah i could
you can see that and it's you know i've
been kind of asking this
question and i touched upon this a
little bit ago in terms of
feeling this call to ground everything
in spirituality
and it's i feel like
and i know others feel like this as well
you know where do you turn because
so many of the traditions that we have
don't seem to answer
or fulfill
that deep desire right now and you know
we can recognize yes they have value
and led us to this point
and you know i i i see a kind of um
and i and i hate the clunkiness of the
term but a kind of eco-spirituality
um but i've also been thinking a lot
about in terms of like
and i see others doing this wanting to
reclaim a paganism
and i see benefits to that
but something that you wrote and some
things that you were talking about
that i think that a lot of folks who are
considering this sort of neo-paganism
they're looking at the ancient gods not
as actual gods but of archetypes
yeah and yet you mention at one point i
think
that this whole experience this journey
that we're on there's going to be
new archetypes and so
i'm wondering and this is a huge
question i don't know
and i don't again i don't know if i can
frame it as well as i would like
but
do you think that these do you think
that this new
spiritual vision is something that is
unfolding now
it's i don't know i guess i'm looking
for
advice to give people and maybe even for
myself in terms of
um how to go about
grounding ourselves in in this new
spiritual
experience and reality as it kind of
unfolds and
i guess we're all probably participants
in the creation of it
um well you know the
the movements that you mentioned
neopaganism
and ego spirituality i see both of these
movements
as attempting to put back into spiritual
discourse
nature which is what was one of the two
things lost
in and the classic patriarchal religions
you know
they're trying to to bring us back
to the innate wisdom of nature
which is a wisdom which runs throughout
our consciousness and throughout our
bodies and connects our body
consciousness to the body consciousness
of earth
and eco spirituality is a way of being
spiritual a way of experiencing a form
of spirituality
which connects us to the planet and
connects us to the stars
and i think we can see this also in the
resurgence of interest in astrology
not kind of a naive mechanistic
understanding of an astrology
but the vision that the universe has a
pulse to it
the galaxies have a pulse and our solar
system has a
pulse to it and if you really know how
to
read that pulse you can kind of
feel how your body and your destiny
unfolds in rhythm with the pulse of the
solar system
and that's a form of ecospirituality of
solar spirituality of
of galactic spirituality so
i think there there is a lot of
dissatisfaction with traditional
forms of religious spirituality
i think psychedelics are very
interesting in that respect i mean
psychedelics
have come along at precisely this time
hold on i'm suddenly got a word that my
computer is about to go there we go
okay uh psychedelics have come along at
a particular time in history of course
they're very old
uh they've been in south america and in
the mesoamerica and
and the native american traditions and
the shamanic traditions have been
working with psychedelics for thousands
of years but in
our culture in our industrialized
culture
they're they're relatively young
and so just that we're at this point in
history
where we are the most educated we have
the most sophisticated science with the
deepest understanding of nature
but we've also bought into the vision
that the entire physical world is devoid
of consciousness
it has no consciousness it's a giant
machine
and it's growing randomly with just
random mutation there's no intelligence
to it there's no intelligence there's no
purpose to our lives there's no
purpose to existence it's just
it's just blind matter spewing out
more complex blind matter at precisely
that point in time
these mind openers have been dropped
into our laps
and they're giving highly educated
people
highly scientifically informed people
the experience
of the the lie that that is a lie
they're being given the experience of
the truth
that our consciousness and our very
existence
is the result of an intelligent action
that the universe is intelligent in fact
it's so intelligent
that all the previous visions of its
intelligence
are inadequate all the visions of
prophetic
revelation and how we have envisioned
that intelligence are totally child's
play
compared to the reality itself
so psychedelics if we use them carefully
and constructively
it can give us direct experience of
layers and layers and layers of this
intelligence
and that that ruptures this vision
that it's all pointless it's all
purposelessness
and that when we die our consciousness
disappears as soon as our brains go
it opens up the eye the experience
that the universe is a living
intelligence and if the universe is
alive
that's an aliveness that we might want
to
merge with to enter into conscious
communion with
so it reanimates this interest in vision
quest
of you know immersing ourselves in
solitude and nature
immersing ourselves in meditation where
we go deeper we sink
deeper and deeper into our consciousness
until we drop
out from underneath the the floor of our
individual consciousness
and enter into communion with the deeper
consciousness
which all spiritual traditions have told
us it's there
but now we can actually accelerate our
immersion into it
so i think there are many many things
going on all at the same time
all of us are kind of helping us
break out of the husks of where we have
been growing in the past
and exposing us to all sorts of new
ideas which are giving us tokens
of where we are going in the future yeah
yeah wonderful and i think that that
is actually i'm mindful of the time it's
i think a beautiful place to end
um so um let me ask i know that you
have a website chrisbash.com
is that the best place for people to
find out more about you and your work
it is and it as of this moment that
website is not finished
but it's almost finished okay and that
is generally the best place for people
to find me or to connect with me you can
also go to
a website called academia.edu
it's where academics post articles
they've published
and if you search for my name there
chris m bash
you'll come to my page and so my most
important publications articles and
things like that
will show up there but soon
uh my website will be done it'll be
finished
and that'll it'll have all my
publications and it'll be an easy place
to
keep track of me and for us to dialogue
okay wonderful
and i know that uh your books are all
widely available
on amazon and bookshop.org
if you don't want to make jeff bezos any
richer than he is
[Laughter]
and is there anything that you have
coming up that you would like the
listeners to know about you know
uh after holding my silence about
psychedelics for so many decades
the conversation that i'm having now is
about psychedelics now i don't think my
experiences
are more important than other people's
psychedelic experiences but they are my
experiences and so they're the best
thing that i have to offer
the psychedelic conversation at this
time
uh and so what i am doing is
hosting conversations
around lsd in the mind of the universe
six week conversations which are
just speaking and those will be
announced on my website
for they're for people who have read the
book
and want to have conversations around
the themes of the book not necessarily
around my
experiences but around the themes that
were touched
in those experiences and i i want these
conversations to be
useful and available to not only to
psychedelically initiated people
but also to people who are not
psychedelically initiated
i get lots and lots of emails from
people who have said
i understand what you're saying i
completely agree with you
i've had many of the same experiences
and i've never done psychedelics at all
and that's the way that's what you would
expect because psychedelics don't give
you an experience
they amplify consciousness and it's got
consciousness that does the work
so of course there are other ways of
working with consciousness to access
these very very deep states
so conversations of with
lsd in the mind of the universe and
you know i'm just i go where i'm called
you know
people want to work together or invite
me to go to different places then i'll
show up
but otherwise i'm i'm comfortable just
being relaxed and growing old
very good well thank you so much for
your time i
thoroughly enjoyed this conversation and
i
look forward to everything you're doing
in the future and um
your work has been very profound for me
so thank you nick
i really appreciate it i've really
enjoyed our conversations today
thank you for the opportunity to talk
with all your viewers
okay well thank you
and that's a wrap on episode 2 of rebel
spirit radio
thank you so much for listening if you
enjoyed this podcast
please make sure to give it a positive
review on apple podcast
spotify or whatever service you use to
listen to podcasts
your reviews really do help and please
consider subscribing
for those viewing on youtube please give
this video a
thumbs up and subscribe to the channel
make sure you hit
that notification bell so you will be
kept in the know regarding upcoming
episodes
for the time being i'll be releasing
every other week with the goal of
releasing them every week in the near
future
also please consider making a donation
via patreon you can make a one-time
donation
or join as a sustaining donor with three
levels of membership available
details can be found at patreon.com
forward slash
rebel spirit your support makes this
podcast possible
i'm nick mather and you've been
listening to rebel spirit radio
until next time may you be in peace and
flourish in all possible ways